The Xbox contains an Ethernet module and one RJ45 connector. Additionally, separate modem and wireless accessories were considered when developing the console. Eventualy an official wireless adapter was released based of a "D-Link 108AG Gaming Adapter" in the end of 2003.

The Xbox has a TCP/IP protocol stack complete with a DNS PPTP, DHCP clients. 

Port 3074 UDP/TCP is reserved for Xbox communications.

== Hardware ==

Integrated in the Nvidia Southbridge MCPX chip which is similar to the nForce chips. The Xbox Linux team used the binary drivers from Nvidia.

=== Wireless adapter ===

based on the "D-Link 108AG Gaming Adapter", the Xbox MN-740 Wireless Bridge bundled with a Xbox install disk (wich would update the dashboard if nececairy).

==== hardware ====

* AR5312 CPU (MIPS 4Kc core?{{citation needed}}) 
* AR5212 RoC (Radio on Chip){{citation needed}} for 2.4 Ghz 802.11b/g{{citation needed}}. 
* KS8721B physical layer transciever
* some Eeprom wich hold the MAC adress (based of FCC pictures and Firmware analysis){{citation needed}} 
* IC42S16400 8Mb ram
* SST39LF0?0A (1 or 2 Mb) (the FCC picture is unclear on the size part due to writing) {{citation needed}} 

The onboard 3 leds are: Power, Wireless and Xbox(called Ethernet on the PCB).
The board seems to have Jtag and what apears to be Serial testpins exposed. 

==== Firmware ====
The shipped firmware does not support WPA or WPA2.
An "firmware" hack based on the D-Link firmware adds WPA support, rendering Dashboard support unfunctional and changing settings requirs connecting to the LAN port using a PC (or webbrowser capable application).
The  runs closed source "ThreadX JADE/Green Hills Version G4.0.4.0" RTOS
and the firmware holds a copyright string of: "Copyright (c) Microsoft Corporation All Rights Reserved Device is Xbox Compatible"

latest firmware is seperated by a boot and runtime firmware {{citation needed}} : 
* MN740_01.03.00.0005_BOOT.bin, "Xbox Wireless Adapter (MN-740) boot firmware"
* MN740_01.00.02.0022_RUNTIME.bin, "Xbox Wireless Adapter (MN-740) runtime firmware"

== System Link == 

{| class="wikitable"
|+XNet* Functions
|-
! function
! description
|-
|XNetCreateKey(&xnkid, &xnkey)
| 
|-
|XNetRegisterKey(&xnkid, &xnkey)
|Register the session key
|-
|XNetXnAddrToInAddr( pxnaddr, pxnkid, &pseudoIP )
|Convert the address to a winsock usable format
|-
|XNetUnregisterKey( &xbc.SessionID )
|
|-
|XNetGetTitleXnAddr( &hostAddr )
|Gets your XNADDR. Used by syslink, and lots of other people.
|-
|XNetGetEthernetLinkStatus()
|
|-
|
|
|-
|
|
|-
|
|
|-
|
|
|-
|
|
|-
|
|
|-
|
|
|}



== Xbox Live ==
Xbox Live is an online multiplayer gaming and digital media delivery service created and operated by Microsoft. It was first made available to the Xbox system in November 2002. ([https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xbox_Live Wikipedia]) Xbox Live support for the original Xbox ended in April 15, 2010. 

The Xbox Live architecture consists of authentication servers, matchmaking servers, and game servers.

=== Matchmaking servers === 

=== Game servers ===

=== Authentication servers ===

Authentication and access to Xbox Live services is controlled using the Kerberos protocol with a few proprietary customizations for the Xbox.

Kerberos Authentication Server: macs.xboxlive.com


{| class="wikitable"
|+Xbox PA-DATA
|-
! padata-type
! description
|-
|131
| ? 
|-
|204
| ?
|-
|206
| Information about Xbox Version, Title, and Title version
|}

=== Xbox Live Functions === 

{| class="wikitable"
|+XOnline* Functions
|-
! function
! description
|-
|XOnlineGetUsers(XONLINE_USER* XBLAccountusers, DWORD* numOfXBLiveAccounts)
|The XOnlineGetUsers function will enumerate both the hard disk and any attached memory units looking for user accounts
|-
|XOnlineTaskClose(XONLINETASK_HANDLE logonHandle)
|Called to abort the authentication process.
|-
|XOnlineStartup( XONLINE_STARTUP_PARAMS* )
|
|-
|XOnlineLogon(XONLINE_USER* XBLLoggedOnUsers, DWORD* XBLservices, DWORD SERVICE_COUNT, NULL, XONLINETASK_HANDLE &logonHandle)
|When a title calls XOnlineLogon to sign in, instead of blocking until the authentication completes, an asynchronous task handle is returned. As part of the authentication process a title must specify which services it will be using (XBLservices, SERVICE_COUNT). 
|-
|XOnlineTaskContinue(XONLINETASK_HANDLE logonHandle)
|Called to check the status of XOnlineLogon.
|-
|XOnlineLogonTaskGetResults(XONLINETASK_HANDLE logonHandle)
|
|-
|XOnlineGetLogonUsers()
|This returns a pointer to an array of XONLINE USER structures. This array is similar the XONLINE USER array we populated and passed into XOnlineLogon, but is updated with error status and permission flags for each user.
|-
|XOnlineSetUserGuestNumber(dwUserFlags , 1)
|
|-
|XOnlineTitleUpdate(DWORD)
|The XOnlineTitleUpdate function will boot into an updater application, which performs the actual update
|-
|XOnlineGetServiceInfo(Service, ?)
|XOnlineGetServiceInfo returns the connection status for a service
|-
|XOnlineNotificationSetState
|
|-
|
|
|-
|
|
|-
|
|
|-
|
|
|-
|
|
|-
|
|
|-
|
|
|}

== Heartbeat ==

    Ethernet II, Src: Microsof_f2:00:00 (00:50:f2:f2:00:00), Dst: Broadcast (ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff)
    MS Network Load Balancing
        Signature: Unknown (0x584f4258)
        Version: 1.1
        Unique Host ID: 3118682055
        Cluster IP: 167.102.81.132 (167.102.81.132)
        Host IP: 4.89.169.109 (4.89.169.109)
        Signature Data - Unknown (1481589336)


== References and links == 
* [https://xboxlivehacking.blogspot.de/ https://xboxlivehacking.blogspot.de/]
* [https://github.com/grayj/Jedi-Academy/blob/master/codemp/xbox/XBLive.cpp https://github.com/grayj/Jedi-Academy/blob/master/codemp/xbox/XBLive.cpp]
* [http://discerning.com/pdfbox/test/input/authentication.pdf http://discerning.com/pdfbox/test/input/authentication.pdf]
* [https://www.google.com/patents/US20040009815 Patent: Managing access to content]
* [https://www.google.com/patents/US20030093669 Patent: Network architecture for secure communications between two console-based gaming systems]
* [https://www.google.com/patents/US20030093668 Patent: Architecture for manufacturing authenticatable gaming systems ]
* [https://www.google.com/patents/US7803052 Patent: Discovery and distribution of game session information ]
* [https://www.google.com/patents/US20030229779 Patent: Security gateway for online console-based gaming ]
* [https://www.google.com/patents/US20030233537 Patent: Presence and notification system for maintaining and communicating information ]
* [https://www.google.com/patents/US7218739 Patent: Multiple user authentication for online console-based gaming ]
* [https://web.archive.org/web/20040831091347/http://www.xbox.com:80/assets/en-us/HardwareManuals/Xnewt.pdf: Xbox Wireless adapter manual]
* [https://www.hanselman.com/blog/FlashingTheFirmwareOfAnXboxMN740WirelessAdapterToADLink108AGToSupportWPASecurity.aspx: Flashing the Firmware of an Xbox MN-740 Wireless Adapter to a D-Link 108AG to support WPA Security ]