{{retrieved|http://www.xbox-linux.org/wiki/Xbox_Hardware_Overview}}


The Xbox is a standard PC, based on standard components, but extended with a some security solutions. This document gives an overview of the components the Xbox is made of.



= Overview =

Viewed by connection (similar to the Windows 2000 Device Manager
view), the Xbox system hardware looks like this:

Diagram modified by Fahad

<pre>Xbox V1.0-1.5
|
|-- Mobile Intel Pentium III 733mHz w/128kb Cache
|
|-- Flash ROM (V1.0/1.1 -
|
\-- PCI bus
    |
    |-- Programmable Interrupt Controller
    |
    |-- System Timer
    |
    |-- DMA Controller
    |
    |-- PCI Bridge Device - Host Bridge									(0:0:0, 0x2a5)
    |
    |-- Memory Controller - SDRAM - Samsung K4D263238M-QC50 133mHz 16mb			(0:0:3, 0x2a6)
    |   |
    |   |-- Top of Motherboard 
    |   |   |
    |   |   |-- Pad 1 (closest to power connector) (empty)
    |   |   |
    |   |   |-- Pad 2 (left of Pad 1)
    |   |   |
    |   |   |-- Pad 3 (below Pad 4)
    |   |   |
    |   |   \-- Pad 4 (closest to AV connector) (empty)
    |   |
    |   \-- Bottom of Motherboard
    |       |
    |       |-- Pad 5 (paralell to Pad 1) (empty)
    |       |
    |       |-- Pad 6 (paralell to Pad 2)
    |       |
    |       |-- Pad 7 (paralell to Pad 3)
    |       |
    |       \-- Pad 8 (paralell to Pad 4) (empty)
    |
    |-- HUB Interface - ISA Bridge 									(0:1:0, 0x1b2) [nForce]
    |
    |-- SMBus Controller	 										(0:1:1, 0x1b4) [nForce]
    |   |
    |   |-- PIC16LC
    |   |
    |   |-- Conexant 25871/Focus 454/Xcalibur Video Encoder
    |   |
    |   |-- ADM1032 System Temperature Monitor
    |   |
    |   \-- Serial EEPROM
    |
    |-- OHCI USB Controller 											(0:2:0, 0x1c2) [nForce]
    |   |
    |   \-- USB HUB (Controller Ports 1 &amp; 2) 
    |
    |-- OHCI USB Controller 											(0:3:0, 0x1c2) [nForce]
    |   |
    |   \-- USB HUB (Controller Ports 3 &amp; 4)
    |
    |-- MCP-X V3 Southbridge 
    |   |
    |   |-- MCP Networking Adapter 									(0:4:0, 0x1c3) [nForce]
    |   |
    |   \-- MCP APU 												(0:5:0, 0x1b0) [nForce]
    |
    |-- AC`97 Audio Codec Interface 									(0:6:0, 0x1b1) [nForce]
    |
    |-- Simple Communication Controller - Generic Modem 	(0:6:1, 0x1c1) [???]
    |
    |-- IDE Controller 											(0:9:0, 0x1bc) [nForce]
    |   |
    |   |-- Primary IDE Channel
    |   |   |
    |   |   |-- Seagate ST3210014ACE 10.2gb (8gb used)/Custom Western Digital WD80EB 8gb hard drive
    |   |   |
    |   |   \-- Custom Samsung/Phillips/Thompson/LG DVD Drive
    |   |
    |   \--- Secondary IDE Channel
    |
    |-- PCI Bridge												(0:8:0, 0x1b8) [nForce]
    |
    \-- AGP Host to PCI Bridge										(0:30:0, 0x1b7) [nForce]
        |
        \-- NV2A GeForce 3MX Integrated GPU/Northbridge 233mHz					(1:0:0, 0x2a0)
</pre>
<br />
PCI devices have their Bus:Dev:Func numbers as well as the DevID
printed next to them. PCI devices with "[nForce]" have the same DevIDs as
their counterparts of the nForce chipset.

A derivative of the Xbox chipset is also available as the PC chipset
"nVidia nForce", which consists of a northbridge with the memory
interface and the GPU and the southbridge with the PCI bus and its
devices, just like the Xbox chipset. Many of the southbridge PCI devices
are the same on both versions, i.e. they have the same DevID.


= The Devices in Detail =

== Intel Pentium III CPU ==

See [[CPU]]

== Flash ROM ==

See [[Flash ROM]]

== PCI bus, Host Bridge, ISA Bridge, AGP Host to PCI Bridge, Memory Controller ==

These devices are identical to the corresponding devices contained in the nForce chipset. The PCI bus can be accessed like on any PC.


== Programmable Interrupt Controller, System Timer, DMA Controller ==

These legacy PC/AT system devices are fully PC-compatible, but the timer frequency is 6% higher than in a PC.


== SMBus Controller ==

Some low-speed devices are connected through the SMBus, so the
southbridge contains an SMBus controller, compatible to the SMBus
controller in the nVidia nForce chipset. Since nForce is based on AMD's original chipset for Athlon CPUs, the SMBus controller is AMD-756 compatible.


== PIC16LC ==

See [[System Management Controller]]

== Video Encoder ==

See [[Video Encoder]]

== ADM1032 System Temperature Monitor ==

The Analog Devices ADM1032 is an SMBus device that does temperature
measurement.


== Serial EEPROM ==

See [[EEPROM]]

== OHCI USB Controller, IDE Controller ==

These devices are compatible to standard PC devices.


== MCP Networking Adapter, MCP APU, Audio Codec Interface ==

These are identical with the nForce devices.


== Simple Communication Controller - Generic Modem ==

Nothing is known about the purpose of this device. It never gets
used by the Xbox system software. It is probably there, because the nForce has a PCI softmodem, but in the Xbox, the corresponding lines of the Southbridge don't seem to be connected.


== NV2A GeForce3 Integrated GPU ==

See [[GPU]]

= Further Information =

Information about all chips and links to technical documentation can
be found at 
[https://web.archive.org/web/20100617022211/http://www.console-dev.com/xbox.htm Pixel8's site]
somehting